---
layout: post
title: ISM Code
tags: ISM regulations safety IMO SOLAS
thumb: 
---

IMO assembly resolution 741(18) adopted the International Management Code for the Safe Operation of Ships and for Pollution Prevention on 4 November 1993 - otherwise known as the International Safety Management (ISM) code.  Ever since, it has served as the cornerstone of the maritime regulatory world, ensuring safety of life, environment and property.

The official objectives of the code are:
      
>1.2 Objectives  
><span style="margin-left:20px;">1.2.1 The objectives of the Code are to ensure safety at sea, prevention of human injury or loss of life, and avoidance of damage to the environment, in particular, to the marine environment, and to property.</span>  
><span style="margin-left:20px;">1.2.2 Safety management objectives of the Company should, inter alia:</span>  
><span style="margin-left:40px;">1.2.2.1 provide for safe practices in ship operation and a safe working environment;</span>  
><span style="margin-left:40px;">1.2.2.2     assess all identified risks to its ships, personnel and the environment and establish appropriate safeguards; and</span>  
><span style="margin-left:40px;">1.2.2.3     continuously improve safety management skills of personnel ashore and aboard ships, including preparing for emergencies related both to safety and environmental protection.</span>  
><span style="margin-left:20px;">1.2.3 The safety and management system should ensure:</span>  
><span style="margin-left:40px;">1.2.3.1     compliance with mandatory rules and regulations; and</span>  
><span style="margin-left:40px;">1.2.3.2     that applicable codes, guidelines and standards recommended by the Organization, Administrations, classification societies and maritime industry organizations are taken into account.</span>  
>
>Reference: *ISM Code Pt.A Reg.1*


In short, it was designed to push companies to proactively establish and implement policies aimed to protect life, environment and property and to, in a way, establish a system by which companies can be held responsible for their failures in this regard.

The code *may* be applied to all ships, but SOLAS Ch.IX (applicable from 1998-07-01) makes it applicable to the following: 
>1\. Passenger ships including passenger high speed craft, not later than 1 July 1998;  
>2\. Oil tankers, chemical tankers, gas carriers, bulk carriers and cargo high speed craft of 500 gross tonnage and upwards, not later than 1 July 1998; and  
>3\. Other cargo ships and mobile offshore drilling units of 500 gross tonnage and upwards, not later than 1 July 2002.  
>
>Reference: *SOLAS Ch.IX Reg.2*


The implementation of the regulation is enforced by the shipping company's Safety and Protection Policy:
>2.1    The Company should establish a safety and environmental protection policy which describes how the objectives, given in paragraph 1.2, will be achieved.  
>2.2    The Company should ensure that the policy is implemented and maintained at all levels of the organization both ship based as well as shore based.
>
>Reference: ISM Code Pt.A Reg.2

